series I love to tell the story.
This is our third Sunday in this series of loving to tell the story.
If you haven't gathered all of the messages this year while each one may feel independent, they are all stories from the Bible.
They all
are all stories that we need to be aware of, we need to know.
Every one of us is at different places and different spots within our spiritual journey.
And some of us, when we talk about David and Goliath, may not exactly know who that is.
We may have heard the names, but we might not know the story.
Or when we talk about Gideon, or when we talk about any number of other things,
we are going to jump in this year because it's hard to be the church.
It's hard to be light, hope, and healing when we don't have anything to communicate, when we haven't placed the stories of God's Word in our heart, so that when we have the opportunity to stand in front of people and to offer them hope and healing,
that we have something to draw from, not only our own story but the stories of Scripture so that we know how to share those.
And I am equally excited in just this third week as I was in the first week to share our message today.
So this month we've been exploring stories of beginnings.
And each month we'll just have a kind of an overarching theme.
They're not necessarily gonna build on each other, but they're just kind of all of a similar type.
And this month has been stories of beginnings.
Why?
Because it's January and it's the beginning of a new year and it's the beginning of new things.
So the first week we talked about why we tell stories.
And so that was just our introduction.
Then last week Pastor Jonathan was
shared with us about the story of Abraham.
Why was that important?
How was that a story of a beginning?
Because that is the beginning of the story of the journey of faith that led us to where we are today.
And so today we're going to jump in and we're going to celebrate the greatest birthday party in history.
Next to Jesus is of course.
Today we're going to look at the stories of beginnings and we're going to look at the birth
of the church.
So again, one week will be an Old Testament story, one week will be a New Testament story so that we can jump through the Bible and the stories of Scripture together.
So have you ever wondered what it would have been like to be there on Pentecost?
Imagine the rushing wind, the tongues of fire, suddenly the promise of Jesus fulfilled.
People speaking in languages that they'd never learned.
And all of a sudden, they have been filled with power from on high.
We like to say, and I love this word, in dude, with power from on high, from the Holy Ghost.
And all of a sudden, imagine what that would have been like to be one of the people that was there.
And you were believing in this new guy, this new teacher, and he said,
Wait, I want to send you a promise and you're just kind of gathered with other people who follow and you're in this place and you're just hanging out and you're going, I'm not really sure this is even going to happen.
And then all of a sudden, the words that the teacher, that the rabbi, the prophet, the words that he promised in a moment were fulfilled and language came.
and tongues of fire stood on everybody's head.
And there was such an outpouring of the Holy Ghost.
What would it be like to be there on that day?
It wasn't just an unforgettable moment.
It was the start of a movement that continues even to this day.
We are a continuation of that moment.
How'd she get an excited amen?
We are Pentecostal.
Oh, I think, brother, I think you and I are Pentecostal, everybody else is Baptist.
Wait, no, don't amen that!
If you're watching online, little digression.
We are Pentecostal, amen?
What does that mean to be Pentecostal?
It means that we believe in the power, in the presence of the Holy Spirit within our lives because this is where it all began at the day of Pentecost, at the birth of the church.
And today we're going to look at how that moment empowers this church.
Not just the church, but this church.
How it empowers us to grow, to thrive, and to fulfill our mission.
Now let me back up and say, I feel guilty.
I wasn't digging on the Baptist, it's just a little thing that Pentecostals and Baptists and all the other denominations do.
We love our Baptist brothers and sisters just as much as we love our Pentecostal brothers and sisters.
There we go, amen.
So today we're gonna look a little close at anybody wanna guess where we're gonna jump in at?
Acts chapter two, okay?
And we're gonna see how the outpouring of the Holy Spirit just didn't mark the birth of the church, but it also set the tone for its mission, its community, and its purpose.
And it's in this that we're going to discover together that the church was born to grow and thrive through the Holy Spirit's power.
So let's pray and invite the same spirit who moved in Acts 2 to move in our hearts today.
Let's pray again.
Father, we're about to break open your word.
We're about to take a moment and look at a moment in history where you chose to pour your spirit out.
And so Father, I pray that as we break open your word today and we consume the knowledge and the wisdom that you have for us, Father, allow your spirit, that same spirit that poured out on Pentecost to permeate everybody within the sound of my voice today.
Let your spirit flow and let your spirit be ever present in your people here today.
In the name of Jesus we pray.
Amen.
So the first thing that the outpouring of the Holy Spirit did was it did this.
It gave the early church the power to begin.
So if you're a note taker, this is point number one.
Let's look at Acts chapter two, verses one to four.
Acts chapter two, verses one to four.
And on the day of Pentecost, all of the believers were meeting together in one place.
Suddenly there was a sound from heaven like a roaring of a mighty windstorm.
And it filled the house where they were sitting.
Then what looked like flames or tongues of fire appeared and settled on each of them.
And everyone present was filled with the Holy Spirit and began speaking in other tongues and other languages as the Holy Spirit gave them this ability.
See, in Acts chapter 2, the disciples were waiting just as Jesus had commanded.
They were obedient.
They weren't just waiting because going, well, I guess we could stand.
I don't have anything else to do today.
So I guess we can go hang out.
No, they were being obedient.
Jesus had commanded them to do this and they did it.
And then all of a sudden, boom, the Holy Spirit arrived with the sound of a rushing wind and tongues of fire.
So what, what did it signify?
The first thing it signified was a fulfilled promise.
Joel chapter two in verse 28 and 29, we very often reference this.
We don't often look at it.
So look at it with me if you will, it'll be on the screen.
It says this, Joel two, 28 and 29 says, then after doing all those things, I will pour out my spirit upon all people.
Your sons and daughters will prophesy.
Your old men will dream dreams and your young men will see visions.
In those days, I will pour out my spirit even on servants, men and women
a like, a like, same.
We all have the power to have the infilling of the Holy Spirit.
But see then in Acts chapter 1 and verse 8,
Again, jumping back to the New Testament.
Jesus again promised this same power when he said, you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you.
It says this, Acts chapter one and verse eight.
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you.
And you will be my what?
Witnesses, say that word, witnesses.
That is the whole, I love to tell the story.
This is the crux of our theme for the entirety of this year.
You will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you.
You will be my witnesses telling people about me everywhere in Jerusalem, throughout Judea, in Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.
This was a fulfilled promise.
This was the beginning of the church, but it was not meant to be the ending of the church when we stand here as a continuation of the Pentecostal movement as Pentecostals.
It is our job to tell the story.
It is our job to be witnesses.
It is our job to go into Jerusalem and Judea and Samaria and to the uttermost parts of the earth.
And some of us are struggling with going across the street.
So might I ask the question that then would be begged?
How is the Holy Spirit living in you?
What Spirit is living in you if you can't go across the street?
I know it's a little bit of toe-stepping.
I'm sorry.
I love you.
It's time to let that Spirit, that same Spirit that raised Christ from the dead dwell in me.
Lord, fill me to overflowing.
Lord, give me your spirit.
Give me your power again.
Renew a right spirit with me.
We sang a version of creating me a clean heart.
The old version said, Lord, create in me a clean heart and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from your presence, Lord.
Let it fill me to overflowing.
Let your spirit come.
And in our modern way, we have been singing and saying, let there be new wine.
Let there be fresh anointing.
Let your spirit come.
Because if our spirit comes, then we'll be His witnesses in Jerusalem and Judea and Samaria and to be the other most parts of the earth.
Amen.
The second thing that this signified was transformational power.
The disciples went from being fearful to being fearless.
Peter, who denied Jesus three times, preached boldly this day, leading thousands to salvation, leading thousands to the anointing and the infilling of the Holy Spirit.
On the other hand, was denying Jesus and saying, and then was insecure and do you love me?
And all of these things that he struggled with, but the Holy Spirit came on him and he began to preach and he began to share.
And God used him to change the known world.
You ever tried to start your car without gas?
Turn the key.
What's it do?
Right?
Guys, you ever been out nice day, not like today?
It's time to mow.
You grab that little thing, pull the rope, pull it.
Your arm starts getting tired and you've pulled it about five times and it's not working.
So what do you finally do?
Let me check the gas.
You didn't check it before.
No, that's not it.
Guys, don't do that.
Okay.
Then we finally check the gas.
Oh, there's no gas.
Now my arm's tired.
Now I don't want to mow because I don't want to have now you got to go get all that.
Okay.
You can pull all you want.
You can turn the key all you want.
But if there's no fuel in the car, if there's no gas in the weed eater, in the mower, it's not going to start.
There's nothing to ignite the flame.
This is what it's like with us.
The Holy Spirit is the fuel.
that ignited the early church.
Without him, the disciples, they couldn't have fulfilled their calling.
Once Jesus left, once the teacher was gone, he sent his spirit to go with them.
Without it, they are powerless.
They are fuelless.
They are flameless.
But with the spirit, they are able and equipped to move forward.
And the reality is, is that Berea Temple, you, Mike Gonzalez, insert your name here are no different.
God doesn't call us to do his work in our own strength.
Listen, each one of us is completely ill-equipped to do what God is calling us to do.
And that includes me.
I hate to tell you that.
We're all grossly under knowledgeable, under physical, under whatever.
But see, by His power, by His Spirit, He gives us the ability.
He gives us the power, the strength, the knowledge, the wisdom to live and to move and to be His witness.
Have you tapped into that power?
Do you stay plugged into it?
Do you continually fill the tank, right?
Because here's the reality.
We joked about the car and the gas tank, right?
We joked about the mower.
That was funny, haha.
You go and get gas because you got to go to work, right?
Are you filling your spiritual tank regularly?
Are you allowing the Holy Spirit to top you off?
When you pray, are you praying in the Spirit?
When you pray, here is the church.
Are you taking time to pray in the spirit without shame?
Again, I started this message off, we are Pentecostal.
We are tapped in to the Holy Spirit, not that our other brothers and sisters aren't, but we have allowed the Spirit to move in such a way that He gives us an initial physical evidence of being tapped into His Spirit by speaking in other tongues.
We covered that about this time last year.
Do we regularly pray?
I don't care who's around, or if you're by yourself in your prayer closet.
Are we allowing the Holy Spirit to fill us and to top us off and ultimately to transform us?
If you have not received the Spirit, the Holy Spirit, if you have not received the physical manifestation of speaking in other tongues, it is a free gift that the Lord wants to grant you.
All you have to do is allow him to do it.
Second thing that the outpouring of the Holy Spirit did was it gave the early church a community like no other.
Berea Temple is a community like no other.
There are very few churches in the United States, very few that are like Berea Temple where we have
eight different nations represented in one congregation, not in separate rooms where the one service is one type, but brothers and sisters from multiple nations worship together and worship the one true God in spirit and in truth.
And the early church was a community like no other.
Look at Acts chapter two, verses 42.
through 47.
It says,
A deep sense of awe came over them all and the apostles performed many miraculous signs and wonders.
And all the believers met together in one place and shared everything that they had.
They sold their property and possessions and shared the money with those in need.
They worshiped together at the temple each day, met in homes for the Lord's Supper and shared their meals with great joy and generosity.
all while praising God and enjoying the goodwill of all the people.
And each day, the Lord added to their fellowship those who were being saved.
See, once the Holy Spirit filled the believers, something amazing happened.
The early church didn't just grow numerically.
Ultimately, they became a family.
They grew in devotion to teaching and fellowship.
Once the Holy Spirit filled the believers, they were united around the impossible's teaching.
Once the Holy Spirit filled the believers, they didn't just go to church, they became the church.
This is something I think that the modern day church struggles with.
We go to church.
And very often we forget to be the church.
Wherever you go, you are taking the church with you.
This is just a building where we all gather that we have called a church.
But the building isn't what makes the church, the people inside it are the church.
When we say that we're going to church, we say we're going to connect with the other bodies, the other people, the other body that God is raising up at the corner of Compton and Russell, and we are going to church, we are going to connect and be part of the people that are here.
If we don't like people, we're in the wrong area.
We need each other.
The church needed each other.
They grew in teaching and in fellowship.
They also grew in radical, hear the word, radical generosity.
Verse 45, it says that they sold property and possessions to give it to anybody who had need.
Stuff didn't matter to them.
Their house, their
parts and pieces and things that they had didn't matter to them.
Once the Holy Spirit filled the believers, their love for one another was tangible and sacrificial.
So I'm going to ask a hard question for each of us to look inward.
Do we love the person sitting next to us?
Or because we tend to sit with family members,
Might we say, do we love the person sitting in front or behind us?
Do we genuinely love them?
Do we want to be around them?
If they were struggling, would you sell your most prized possession so that you could gather the money to give to them?
Are they worthy of that?
Would you give them your coat
because they forgot to wear one today forgetting that the building struggles to keep warm in the winter and you came all bundled up and they forgot.
They stupidly wore short sleeves and a thin shirt.
Would they be worthy of you taking off your coat and you being cold for a little while?
If not, might I encourage us to begin to seek the infilling of the Holy Spirit again?
to begin to cry out to the Holy Spirit, to fill us again, to be present again, for fresh anointing to happen at Berea Temple, again, for fresh new wine to be pressed.
And what again, we gotta go back to the word pressed.
To be able to get the new wine, we have to be a little bit pressed.
That means things get a little bit tough, but the pressing comes.
They also grew in daily worship.
and then numerical growth.
Once the Holy Spirit filled the believers, worship wasn't reserved for Sundays.
This is not the worship day.
We call it a worship service, because that's what we do.
But worship happens whether you're at your home, in your car.
Man, be driving, be stopped at a stoplight, and have the person in the car next to you be looking at you like, what are they doing?
I mean, you're just, you're praising the Lord, you're rocking out to Jesus, whatever it may be.
Or maybe you're calling down fire from heaven and you got a tongue of fire sitting in your car and they're going, that dude's on fire, literally.
Verse 47 says, and the Lord added to their numbers daily, those who were being saved.
Holy spirit, come and be in this place again.
Holy Spirit, dwell among your people.
Fill your people to overflowing.
I like to camp.
I know camping's not everybody's cup of tea, but I love to go camping.
The more wood that you put on a campfire, my favorite thing in the world is to build a campfire.
I've gotten pretty good at it.
And I love to build.
I like to build the great big ones that get real big.
And the more wood that you put on the fire, the brighter and hotter that it burns.
It's kind of the same way in the early church.
They grew stronger as they came together.
Each person brought their strength, their passion, their burning desire to move in the power and the presence of the Holy Spirit as they shared their resources.
And they lived out their faith and the church grew daily.
Now I'm not asking you to bring all your stuff here to the church and move into one of the rooms.
However, are we bringing our first fruits?
Are we bringing our first time?
Our first efforts?
our best strengths, our best words, our best version of ourselves to the house of God and sharing it with our brothers and sisters because today my strength is somebody else is
is shoring up somebody else's weakness.
And next Sunday, my weakness is gonna be shored up because somebody came and said, listen, I know you're struggling, but I wanna pray with you for a moment.
It's not just for the pastor to pray.
It's for all of us to pray.
And I wanna meet you at the altar and I wanna lay hands on you and I'm gonna grab a bottle of anointing oil and I'm gonna pray down heaven upon you because I know you're going through something and the Lord has given me a word of knowledge, a word of wisdom.
And I know that you need to be touched and I'm gonna pray for you
going to stay here and we're going to pray through until the Lord gives you an answer.
We need Bereans like that who are not ashamed of the gospel.
They're not ashamed of what the Lord is doing in their lives.
They're not ashamed
to speak in their prayer language and allow the Lord to do whatever it is that He's gonna do through that moment.
See, we have to ask ourselves, how do we take that kind of power, that kind of action, and how do we reflect this kind of a community today?
Are we devoted to God's Word?
Do we read our Bibles daily?
Do we look out for each other's needs?
I want us to be the kind of church that shines so brightly that people can't help but be drawn to Jesus.
I love to tell the story series this year.
I've got several initiatives that we're going to start.
They're not big and grandiose and expensive.
They're simple.
They're free.
But do you know what they're going to need?
They're going to need hands.
Your hands, my hands.
They're going to need voices.
My voice, your voice.
And they're going to need time.
We want to tell the story of Jesus.
We want to tell the story of salvation to our community, our neighbors.
We want our neighbors to know that we exist and that we again are a bright shining star in the middle of Compton Heights.
The third thing that the outpouring of the Holy Spirit did was it gave the early church a mission
to transform the world.
I apologize, I did not change this slide.
That was two weeks ago's third point.
So it is the point if you're a note taker is a mission to transform the world.
And we're gonna go to Acts chapter two and verse 41.
It says, those who believed what Peter said were baptized and added to the church that day
about a couple.
You know, there's like, I don't know, maybe 10 people.
Come on!
They added 3,000 in all that day.
3,000.
This church ran about a thousand in its heyday.
We'd be lucky to get that many in here.
We had about 350 in here for the one concert and we about packed this room out.
What would the Lord do if, what would we do if the Lord sent a thousand again?
Come on, Lord, do it again.
If He did it before, He can do it today.
Come on.
If He did it back then, He can do it with us today.
We don't have to see the red.
We don't have to see friends and we can grow.
See, Pentecost wasn't just about receiving the Holy Spirit.
It was about being sent out in His power.
Again, Peter preached and 3,000 people were saved.
That is what we call exponential growth.
Most churches can't grow like that because they don't have the processes, the system, the people, the leadership in place to be able to accommodate that many people.
And so what are we doing as a church to prepare for that?
We're preparing our field.
We have young men who are now in lead 20.
We should reintroduce the lead 2024 guys.
We now have lead 2025 guys that are now starting the process.
We don't have any young ladies yet.
We need young ladies to start lead 2025.
If you're interested, see me.
Sister Latisha would love to connect with you.
See, Pentecost was about being sent out as an empowered witness.
Again, Acts 818 reminds us that the Holy Spirit empowers us to be witnesses to the ends of the earth.
So I just kind of highlighted those words.
Pentecost was about being sent out on a global mission.
As the assemblies of God we shared with you are 16 fundamental truths last year.
But the assemblies of God, as we gather, as we came together at our creation, we came together for this purpose, was to be able to send missionaries around the world.
Because the church has never been intended, it was never meant to be confined to one place.
The church was never meant to be just here.
By the end of the book of Acts, the gospel was spreading across the entirety of the Roman Empire.
You ever go out to a lake, go to the water?
One of my favorite things to do when I was a kid was to skip rocks.
Do you know what that is?
You take a real smooth rock and you see the water and if you hook the rock just right, you can chuck it and it'll skip across the water.
And what does that do?
It creates these ripples.
If you take a drop of water and you drop it in a completely pool of water and you take a drop and drop it, it'll send those ripples all throughout.
They start really small, but as it goes outward, it gets bigger and bigger and bigger.
See, the church started in Jerusalem, but the ripple effect of Pentecost
has reached all the way to St. Louis.
It's reached all the way to California, all the way to Canada, all the way down to the Cape of Horn, and everywhere in between.
See, Pentecost still reaches us today, 2,000 years later.
So I wanna ask a question.
Are we part of God's mission?
Yay, nay.
Today, 2,000 years later, he gave this word, he told the early church, he told the early believers, stay, wait for the promise that I'm gonna send my spirit.
And he sent it to them.
But are we still part of that mission to go to the uttermost parts of the earth today?
Hmm, I'm not hearing any responses, but of course we are.
The answer is yes.
Whether it's through praying, giving or going, we are called to make disciples.
We are not called to sit in church on Sunday and feel good and pat ourselves on the back and say, I've done my spiritual duty for the week.
We are called to make disciples.
Everybody in your life
including you has three people that you need to have in your life.
You need to have a Paul.
You need to have somebody who's older than you that is speaking into your life.
Somebody who's mentoring you, who is spiritually filling you.
Jesus is good.
Holy Spirit is good.
That's ultimate.
But you need a physical person who is pouring into your life that you can call in.
Hey, I have a question about X.
Can you help me?
Because they've already been there.
They've already done it.
They've already gone down the road.
They've already worked through their faith.
And then everybody needs a Barnabas.
That's somebody at the same level as them.
That means that somebody that's walking at the same stage of life that you are, they're of the roughly the same age, probably of the same gender, somebody who is walking the same challenges.
If you're a young mom with small kids, you need another young mom with small kids.
So you can say, hey, how do you
How did you break a little Johnny of biting everybody?
Or how did you whatever it might be?
Or how do you find time in the midst of making dinner and going to work and trying to keep your husband happy and little Johnny from biting everybody?
Where do you find time to pray?
Where do you find time to read your Bible?
So we all need a Barnabas, same level, same place.
And every one of us needs a Timothy in our life.
That's somebody that we're pouring into.
We're their Paul.
In their life, we become the Paul.
Every one of us needs to be speaking life.
This is where we need to be making disciples.
We need to be discipling someone.
Again, somebody of probably the same gender typically doesn't work well to cross genders.
but somebody of the same gender but who is at a lower spiritual level than you.
That does not necessarily mean they are younger than you, but it may simply be they are not in the same journey as you spiritually.
That means men, women, that means somebody who's come down to the altar and they have given their heart and life to Jesus and the Lord gives you a word and he says you need to go and you need to disciple that young man.
You need to disciple that young woman because you know they're a little bit of their story and you
You struggled with the same things that they're struggling with today.
You struggled with 10 years ago and you need to be able to speak into their life and help them walk that initial journey.
And guess what?
There again, I want to point back to our welcome center.
We have tools and resources available for you for that so that you don't have to do it alone.
So here's what I want to ask us to do.
want us to ask the Holy Spirit to show us how we can help transform our world for Christ.
Might I even just say help us transform our neighborhood, our Oikos, our community.
Let's begin to pray.
Lord, give me the words and the story to tell to make a transformation today.
So let's close.
I want us to reflect on the birth of the church, that moment at Pentecost.
And I want us to remember these three things.
The church began with the power of the Holy Spirit.
Berea Temple
is to begin and did begin under the power of the Holy Spirit.
It was built to be a family that loves, serves and worships together.
Not separate, not by tribe, not by gender, not by race, not by color, not by creed, but by my spirit, says the Lord, that we worship together, that we love each other, that we serve our community and serve each other together.
And the church was then
on a mission to transform their known world.
And that same spirit who filled the early church, who filled the early believers.
He's present with us today.
He's ready to empower us.
The question is, are we ready to embrace that power?
Are we ready to ignite that power within us?
Or are we going to be like a wet match?
That's the kids playing upstairs.
Nobody get worried.
The very first time I heard it, it worried me and I realized what it was.
See, if we're like the wet match and we go to strike, what happens?
Anybody ever tried to light a wet match and the sulfur at the end is all mushy?
And you go and you put it against the striker, what happens?
All the sulfur just falls off and disintegrates and then the match is no good.
So what are we doing to prepare ourselves to be ready to embrace that power?
Because that power will fall again when we as a church are ready, when we have prepared ourselves.
So I want to challenge you to do two things.
How can you contribute to the unity and growth of our church?
And number two, are you ready to let the Holy Spirit use you for God's mission?
Because I don't believe that the word the Lord gave me for I love to tell the story.
I do not believe was just a nice
little thing to do to kind of bring some stories together.
I believe that he's beginning to do something and we as the leadership team believe that the Lord is doing something and we want to be ready for it.
We as a body want to be ready for it.
So let's take a moment.
Let's seek the Lord together.
Let's pray.
Father, we thank you.
Lord, we are asking that you would begin to do a new work.
Father, I pray that is each one of us are considering and contemplating the words that were shared today.
God, I pray that your spirit would press in.
Father, that unity would happen within our church, that growth would happen within our church and that your power from on high would come and to fill us to overflowing and we would be your witnesses in Jerusalem and Judea and Samaria and to the uttermost parts of the earth.
Every head bowed and every eye closed.
Maybe you're saying, Lord, fill me afresh with your spirit today.
Maybe you're ready to commit to building and growing our church family, whether that's through serving as a small group leader that's getting ready to come up or it's through putting yourself in a place to be a witness to what God is doing.
I want to invite you and I want us to spend just a moment in prayer together.
Or maybe you need to accept Jesus for the very first time.
I want to invite you to the altar.
If you said any of those, I want you to come, I want you to find a place at the altar or in your seat, turn around and kneel and pray.
And I want us to take some time together to open our hearts and allow the Holy Spirit to begin to move.
Because the truth is church,
that the same God who added to their numbers daily in the book of Acts wants to work in and through us today.
And so let's take a few moments to trust him, to rely on his spirit and to get out this week and be the church that he's called us to be.
So Father, I pray right now, boldness and strength
and power over this congregation, whether by those physically here or by the sound of my voice online.
Father, do a fresh work and a fresh anointing.
We praise you and we thank you.
It is in the name of Jesus.
We pray the altars are open as we close in our final song.
We are here.